Consumer foraging behaviors are dynamic, changing in response to prey
availability, seasonality, competition, and even the physiological
states of the consumers. The isotopic composition of a consumer is a
product of these factors as well as the isotopic ‘landscape’ of its
prey, i.e. the isotopic mixing space. Stable isotope mixing models are
used to back-calculate the most likely proportional contribution of a
set of prey to a consumer’s diet based on their respective isotopic
distributions, however they are disconnected from ecological process.
Here we build a mechanistic framework that links the ecological and
physiological processes of an individual consumer to the isotopic
distribution that describes its diet, and ultimately to the isotopic
composition of its own tissues, defined as its ‘isotopic niche’. By
coupling these processes, we systematically investigate under what
conditions the isotopic niche of a consumer changes as a function of
both the geometric properties of its mixing space and foraging
strategies that may be static or dynamic over time. Results of our
analytical derivations reveal general insight into the conditions that
impact isotopic niche width as a function of consumer specialization on
prey, as well as its ability to transition between diets over time. We
show analytically that moderate specialization on isotopically unique
prey can serve to maximize a consumer’s isotopic niche width, while
temporally dynamic diets will tend to result in peak isotopic variance
during dietary transitions. We demonstrate the relevance of our
theoretical findings by examining a marine system composed of nine
invertebrate species commonly consumed by sea otters. In general, our
analytical framework highlights the complex interplay of mixing space
geometry and consumer dietary behavior in driving expansion and
contraction of the isotopic niche. Because this approach is established
on ecological mechanism, it is well-suited for enhancing the ecological
interpretation, and uncovering the root causes, of observed isotopic
data.

Introduction
============

Consumer foraging behaviors are dynamic, often resulting in variable
diets that change over time and space as a function of environmental
conditions, the densities of consumers and available resources, and even
the physiological states of individual foragers, to name a few.
Understanding how diets change, and to what extent different conditions
promote or inhibit specific changes, is both a challenging theoretical
and empirical problem in ecology, but is essential for elucidating the
adaptive nature of complex ecological systems.

The comparison of carbon ($\delta^{13}\rm{C}$) and nitrogen
($\delta^{15}\rm{N}$) stable isotope values of a consumer with respect
to its potential prey is a commonly utilized approach to quantify diet
composition. The carbon and nitrogen isotopic composition of a consumer
represents that of the food it eats, but is offset by predictable
amounts, often called trophic discrimination factors, that are mediated
by consumer physiology
[@VanderZanden:2001p2449; @Post:2002wn; @FoxDobbs:2007kx; @Bearhop:2010db].
The isotopic composition of a consumer thus reflects 1) the proportional
contribution of different prey to the consumer’s diet
[@Moore:2008kg; @Parnell:2010ub], and 2) the isotopic composition of its
prey, collectively described as the isotopic, or prey, mixing space
[@Phillips:2001ws; @Phillips:2002tu; @Newsome:2007tz].

The isotopic niche of a consumer is a low-dimensional specification of
the ‘Hutchinsonian niche’ [@Hutchinson:1957tg], an n-dimensional
hypervolume that defines all biotic and abiotic requirements needed for
a species to exist. The isotopic niche is also generally derived from
both biotic and abiotic processes, but in contrast to the large and
ultimately immeasurable construct of the n-dimensional hypervolume,
isotopic niches are defined exactly as a consumer’s isotopic variance
with a dimension determined by the number of isotope systems employed
[@Bearhop:2004im; @Newsome:2007tz; @Newsome:WhhVfocb; @delRio:2011p2553; @Jackson:2011kd].
It is the width, or spread of this distribution that correlates to the
breadth of the isotopic niche. Although the isotopic niche can be the
result of many ecological and environmental factors that influence the
flow of elements through biological systems [@Araujo:2007iua], when it
is primarily driven by consumer-resource interactions, the isotopic
niche is synonymous with the trophic niche as defined by
@Bearhop:2004im. Changes in the size of the isotopic niche have been
shown to relate to ecosystem fragmentation [@Layman:2007ky],
evolutionary diversification [@Fedosov:2014hm], changes in food
availability [@Lehmann:2015db], and even individual responses to
seasonal environments [@delRio:2011p2553], however a systematic
understanding of how different sources of variability influence the
isotopic niche is lacking.

Both the consumer’s dietary strategy as well as the isotopic mixing
space contribute different sources of variability that are reflected in
the isotopic composition of the consumer. For example, a consumer could
be an obligate specialist on a single prey, such that its dietary
variability is extremely low, in which case the isotopic mean and
variability of the consumer’s tissues will reflect that of its targeted
prey. In contrast, the consumer could be a generalist, or intermediate
specialist on certain prey such that the variability in its diet as well
as the isotopic variability of its prey contributes to its own isotopic
composition. Thus, the isotopic composition of a consumer is not only a
reflection of what the consumer eats, but is also determined by the
mixing space over which it integrates isotope values, and the amount of
time over which a particular tissue integrates dietary inputs.

The isotopic niche is generally defined with respect to the isotopic
variance of a population
[@Araujo:2007iua; @Araujo:2009p2286; @Fink:2012eg], however
population-level variance is itself an artifact of the individual-level
distributions from which the population is composed
[@Bolnick:2007p1253; @Araujo:2011gm]. An important step in understanding
how the isotopic niche changes in response to different consumer
foraging strategies is to examine how individual-level variation
contributions to observed isotopic variability. Individual-level
variability, in particular that variability resulting from temporal
changes in diet, has large implications for the population
[@Kondoh:2003p1625; @Kondoh:2006p1622; @Schreiber:2011wx]. For example,
populations with greater individual-level variability have been shown to
exhibit greater stability [@Bolnick:2011gj], and in certain cases can
increase the likelihood of species coexistence [@Schreiber:2011wx].
Changes in individual diet through time is frequently measured via
stable isotope analysis of metabolically inert, temporally-integrating
tissues such as hair, whiskers, claws, or even growth layers in teeth
[@Koch:1995vj; @Matthews:2004hw; @Sponheimer:2006fj; @Post:2008ki; @Newsome:2009tn; @Yeakel:2009hz; @Hopkins:2015ip].

Once physiologically-mediated isotopic discrimination between a consumer
and its food has been accounted for, the isotopic niche is a direct
reflection of the proportional contribution of different prey resources
to the consumer’s diet. Isotope mixing models, which originally used a
bootstrapping framework [@Phillips:2003kq; @Phillips:2005p1007] and now
employ Bayesian methods
[@Moore:2008kg; @Parnell:2010ub; @Hopkins:2012dza; @Parnell:2012wv], are
used to reconstruct the probability distribution that describes the
contribution of different prey; mixing models can only be solved exactly
if the number of potential prey resources are less than or equal to the
number of isotope systems used plus one. These tools are forensic in
nature, and can be used to back-calculate consumer diets across a range
of isotopically distinct prey with differing stoichiometries
[@Hopkins:2015ip], to quantify intra- and inter-population niche
variability [@Semmens:2009uq], to reconstruct diets of extinct taxa
[@Yeakel:2012uc], and even combined with process-based models that are
designed to constrain contribution-to-diet estimates based on known
mechanistic relationships between species [@Ogle:2014jg].

A conceptually divergent, yet parallel, strategy is to consider the
inter-related effects of ecological interactions and the concomitant
integration of stable isotope values, and how these factors combine to
result in the isotopic composition of a consumer. In this way, the
consumer’s isotopic distribution can be forward-integrated through time
based on the mechanistic linkages between its foraging strategy, its
ability to find and acquire prey, and the isotopic landscape (mixing
space) over which its diet is composed. This general perspective has
been applied to investigate properties of the isotopic niche for cases
of fixed (non-varying) diets [@Araujo:2007iua; @Araujo:2009p2286], and
with respect to experimental systems where consumers are forced to
switch between unique prey [@Fink:2012eg]. However, such a process-based
framework has not been directly linked to consumer foraging behaviors,
prey availability, or other ecological considerations such that the
combined impacts of ecologically-mediated dietary variation and mixing
space geometry on the isotopic niche can be assessed.

Here we build a mechanistic framework that links the ecological and
physiological processes of an individual consumer to the isotopic
distribution that describes its diet, and ultimately to the isotopic
composition of its own tissues. By coupling these processes, we are able
to systematically investigate under what conditions the isotopic niche
of a consumer changes as a function of both geometric properties of its
mixing space, and alternative foraging strategies. We show that the
isotopic variance of a consumer’s diet (and by extension the width of
its isotopic niche) is expected to be a concave parabolic function with
respect to prey specialization, such that it possesses a peak variance,
though the appearance of this peak is contingent on mixing space
geometry. We demonstrate the potential importance of these findings by
examining a prey mixing space for sea otters (*Enhydra lutris*), which
are known to possess high dietary individuality
[@Estes:2003uc; @Tinker:2008tp; @Newsome:2009tn; @Newsome:2015gy].

We then extend our framework to explore how a consumer’s isotopic niche
responds to temporally dynamic diets. We examine an example of a switch
between two probabilistic diets that oscillates between, for example,
seasons, and show analytically that the maximum expected isotopic niche
width occurs during the transitions between diets. Determining how
different sources of variability emerge from ecological, behavioral, and
geometric drivers is important for interpreting the meaning of concepts
such as the isotopic niche. Moreover, integrating these different
sources of variation into a statistical process-based framework lends
itself particularly well to hypothesis-testing aimed at uncovering the
root causes of observed isotopic data. We hope that our approach is a
step towards assessing how the isotopic niche may change due to more
complex foraging behaviors and even population dynamics, and we expand
on these ideas in the Discussion.

Methods & Analysis
==================

We begin by establishing a forward-integration approach for modeling the
incorporation of stable isotopes from multiple resources into a
consumer’s tissues. This new methodology provides an analytical link
between the mechanistic drivers of foraging and the distribution of
stable isotope values describing a consumer’s tissues over time. Using
this framework, we aim to 1) examine how certain dietary behaviors, such
as prey specialization and different modes of dietary variation, impact
the isotopic variance of consumer tissues, and 2) show how these methods
can be expanded to include foraging behaviors that themselves are
temporally dynamic, changing over seasons or years. Accordingly, our
general goal is to reveal how both ecological and geometric factors can
influence the expansion and contraction of isotopic variability, thus
aiding ecological interpretation of the ‘isotopic niche’.

Deriving the within-individual isotopic niche width {#deriving-the-within-individual-isotopic-niche-width .unnumbered}
---------------------------------------------------

There are many ways to statistically summarize the integration of prey
by a consumer species, however in order to establish a mechanistic link
between foraging and the consumer’s isotopic composition, we follow the
proceeding heuristic foraging mechanic. We assume that a consumer
encounters and consumes resources in proportion to the encounter rate of
each prey; prey that are encountered more frequently are assumed to be
consumed more frequently. An alternative approach could incorporate
preferences [@Chesson:1983bt] or even state-dependence
[@Mangel:1988uaa; @Clark:2000tra; @Mangel:2014kz], and we will briefly
address these considerations in the Discussion. As prey are encountered
and consumed, the prey’s isotope values are incorporated into the
consumer’s tissues weighted by the prey-specific proportional
contribution to diet. The resulting distribution that describes the
dietary input of multiple prey (each with isotope values that are
independently and Normally distributed) is a mixed Normal distribution
with weights determined by the prey’s proportional contribution to diet.
This proportional contribution is itself a random variable drawn from a
Dirichlet density (a multivariate Beta distribution) that serves as a
probabilistic description of the consumer’s dietary input
[@Ainsworth:2010uo]. The following section details our probabilistic
determination of the consumer’s isotopic composition. We focus our
attention on the variability of the isotopic distribution describing the
consumer’s diet, which scales directly with the consumer’s own isotopic
distribution, which is itself equivalent to the isotopic niche
[@Bearhop:2004im; @Newsome:2007tz]. Here and henceforth, we assume that
the isotope ratios under consideration follow dietary pathways such that
the isotopic niche is synonymous with the trophic niche
[@Bearhop:2004im].

A consumer encounters each prey at a frequency determined by a Poisson
process with parameter $\psi_i$, which determines the number of
encounters $M_i=m_i$ between time 0 and time $t$, with the frequency
distribution

$$f_{M_i} (m_i|\psi_i) = {\rm e}^{-\psi_i t}\frac{(\psi_i t)^m_i}{m_i!}.$$

Here and henceforth, we use the general function $f(\cdot)$ to denote
different frequency distributions, as well as uppercase notation to
describe stochastic variables, and lowercase notation to describe
specific values of stochastic variables. If we assume that encounter
rates are variable, such that some prey are more patchily distributed
than others, we can treat $\Psi_i = \psi_i$ as a random variable with a
Gamma density

$$f_{\Psi_i} (\psi_i | c, a_i) = \frac{c^{a_i}}{\Gamma (a_i)}{\rm e}^{-c \psi_i}\psi_i^{a_i - 1}.$$

Here, $a_i$ is the dispersion parameter, which is proportional to the
encounter rate, and $c$ scales with the time between encounters
[@Mangel:2006wa; @Ainsworth:2010uo; @Yeakel:2013hi]. If we integrate
across all possible values of $\psi_i$, we obtain the Negative Binomial
density with mean encounter rate $a_i/c$ and coefficient of variation
$1/\sqrt{a_i}$ [@Hilborn:1997ds]. Following the derivation described by
@Ainsworth:2010uo, if we define the proportional contribution of prey to
a consumer’s diet to scale with the encounter rate, such that

$$\label{eqp}
  p_i = \frac{\psi_i}{\sum_{j=1}^n \psi_j},$$

then the random variable $P_i = p_i$ where $P_i \in {\bm P}$ and
$p_i \in {\bm p}$, and $\sum_i p_i = 1$, and note that we allow boldface
type to denote vectors of variables. From Eq. [eqp], it follows that the
vector describing the proportional contributions to diet $\bm P$ follows
a Dirichlet distribution [@Johnson:1960gu] with density

$$f_{\bm P}(p_1,...,p_n|a_1,...,a_n) = \frac{\Gamma(\sum_{i=1}^n a_i)}{\sum_{i=1}^n\Gamma(a_i)}\prod_{i=1}^n p_i^{a_i - 1},$$

where $\Gamma(\cdot)$ is the gamma function [cf. @Mangel:2006wa]. As
such, the expected proportional contribution of a prey $i$ to the
consumer’s diet has the expectation ${\rm E}\{P_i\}=a_i/a_0$ where
$a_0 = \sum_i a_i$, and variance

$$\label{eqDirVar}
  {\rm V}\{P_i\} = \frac{a_i(a_0 - a_i)}{a_0^2(a_0 + 1)}.$$

In this paper we consider the case where resources are plentiful and
feeding is regular, and we draw a single prey $i$ with probability $p_i$
for inclusion to the consumer’s diet. Describing the dietary behavior of
a consumer as a Dirichlet distribution provides a flexible and powerful
framework to investigate how different foraging strategies influence a
consumer’s isotopic niche. For example, a pure generalist consumer would
have a Dirichlet distribution with parameters $a_i = 1$ for all prey
$i=1,...,n$, such that the marginal distribution for $P_i$ is close to
uniform with expectation ${\rm E}\{P_i\} = 1/n$. Because we have assumed
that the proportional contribution of a prey to the consumer’s diet
scales with the prey’s encounter rate, this would be analogous to a
system where a consumer is equally likely to encounter the same number
of any prey. In contrast, an obligate specialist would have a Dirichlet
density that is spiked for a given prey $k$, such that the single
parameter $a_k \gg 1$, while $a_{i \neq k} = 1$. The use of a Dirichlet
distribution is also at the heart of Bayesian isotope mixing models
[@Moore:2008kg; @Parnell:2010ub; @Hopkins:2012dza; @Parnell:2012wv],
which assume a Dirichlet prior and enable the input of alternative
dietary information to inform isotopic data.

If the stable isotope ratios for each of the potential prey follow
independent Normal distributions, and the dietary behavior of the
consumer has a Dirichlet density, the resultant density that describes
the isotopic distribution of a consumer’s diet $f_Z(Z=z)$ is a mixed
Normal distribution, with weights given by $\bm p$ drawn from the
Dirichlet. Given that the isotopic means and variances for prey $i$ are
denoted by $\mu_i$ and $\sigma^2_i$, respectively, this density can be
written as

$$\label{eqfZ}
f_Z(z|{\bm a},{\bm \mu},{\bm \sigma}) = \left(\sum_{i=1}^n p_i\frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi \sigma_i^2}}{\rm e}^{-\frac{(z-\mu_i)^2}{2\sigma_i^2}}\right)f_{\bm P}(\bm p | \bm a),$$

with the expectation

$$\label{eqEZ}
  {\rm E}\{Z\} = \sum_{i=1}^n \frac{a_i}{a_0} \mu_i,$$

Accordingly, the isotopic mean of the consumer’s diet is a weighted
average of the isotopic means of its potential prey, where weights are
determined by the outcome of the Dirichlet random variable. Of more
interest to us here is the variance of $Z$, which will allow us to
analytically determine the isotopic niche width of the consumer as a
function of its dietary behavior and the mixing space of its prey. We
find that

$$\label{eqVarZ}
  {\rm V}\{Z\} = \sum_{i=1}^n \frac{a_i}{a_0}\left(\sigma_i^2 + \mu_i^2\right) - \frac{a_i^2\mu_i^2}{a_0^2}-\sum_{i \neq j}\frac{a_i a_j \mu_i \mu_j}{a_0^2}.$$

Although the form of Eq. [eqVarZ] is not intuitive, we emphasize that -
over different dietary behaviors that shape the Dirichlet distribution
and for different isotopic mixing spaces - it is this equation that
governs the expansion or contraction of the consumer’s isotopic niche
width, and therefore of chief ecological interest.

The isotopic variance of the consumer’s diet ${\rm V}\{Z\}$ can be
simplified by considering a specific set of dietary behaviors. Here we
examine how ${\rm V}\{Z\}$ is influenced by generalist vs. specialist
consumer diets, as well as the role of general mixing space geometries,
in determining consumer isotopic niche width. It is important to note
that specialism, as discussed here defines the degree to which a
consumer’s diet is dependent on a single prey resource, ranging from
$s=1/n$ (obligate generalization) to $s=1$ (obligate specialization). It
is thus conceptually different than ‘individual specialization’ defined
as the proportional variance of an individual relative to that of its
population [Within-Individual Component / Total Niche Width, or WIC/TNW;
@J:1979wc], and often the variable of interest in other studies
examining properties of the isotopic niche
[@Araujo:2007iua; @Araujo:2009p2286; @Araujo:2011gm; @Layman:2011cm].

If a generalist consumer alters its diet to include more of a certain
prey $k$ relative to the others, the Dirichlet distribution that defines
its dietary behavior goes from $a_i=1$ for all $i=1,...,n$ to
$a_{i \neq k}=1$ for $i=1,...,n$, with $a_k>1$. As specialization
increases, the Dirichlet parameter corresponding to the targeted prey
$k$ increases to a value much higher than one (pure specialization is
obtained only at the limit $a_k \to \infty$). Thus, we can assume that
$a_i=1$ for all $i \neq k$, and $a_k = (n-1)s_k/(1-s_k)$, where $s_k$
denotes specialization on prey $k$. We can thus substitute
$a_0 = (n-1)/(1-s_k)$ and $p_i = a_i/a_0 = (1-s_k)/(n-1)$ for all
$i \neq k$, and $a_k/a_0 = s_k$. We can then rewrite Eq. [eqVarZ] as

$$\label{eqVarZs}
{\rm V}\{Z\} = \frac{1-s_k}{n-1}\sum_{i \neq k}^n \left(\sigma_i^2 + \mu_i^2\right) + s_k(\sigma_k^2 + \mu_k^2) - \left(\frac{1-s_k}{n-1}\sum_{i \neq k}^n \mu_i + s_k\mu_k \right)^2,$$

and note that, independent of the prey mixing space (a function of
$\mu_i$ and $\sigma_i^2$ for prey $i=1,...,n$), the isotopic variance of
the consumer’s diet will always be a concave parabolic function over
$s_k$. With respect to the size of the consumer’s isotopic niche width,
this means that there can be a peak variance for a value of $s_k$
intermediate to pure generalization ($s_k=1/n$) and pure specialization
($s_k=1$).

The peak variance $\hat s_k$, which describes the maximum isotopic
variance of the consumer, may or may not fall between $s_k=1/n$ and
$s=1$, and is only of ecological interest if it does. The peak variance
can be solved analytically by setting the derivative of Eq. [eqVarZs]
with respect to $s_k$ equal to zero, and solving for $s_k$, which
results in

$$\hat s_k = \frac{A(1-n)+B (n-1)^2+2 C (C-D n+D)}{2 (C-D n+D)^2},$$

where $A = \sum_{i \neq k}^n \left(\sigma_i^2 + \mu_i^2\right)$,
$B = \left(\sigma_k^2 + \mu_k^2\right)$, $C = \sum_{i \neq k}^n \mu_i$,
and $D = \mu_k$.

Determination of the peak variance allows us to predict where the
consumer’s isotopic niche is expected to be maximized as a function of
specialization on different prey. Although here we have focused on the
special case where a consumer targets a single prey, one can rewrite the
equation for the consumer’s isotopic niche width with respect to
increasing specialization on any number or combination of prey in the
mixing space. For example, in the case where a consumer specializes on
two prey (e.g. two species of crab), one would rewrite Eq. [eqVarZ] in
terms of both $s_k$ (specialization on prey $k$) and $s_l$
(specialization on prey $l$), resulting in a concave parabolic plane in
dimensions $s_k$ and $s_l$. Determining the maximum variance would then
entail taking the derivative of Eq. [eqVarZ] with respect to both $s_k$
and $s_l$. In dimensions higher than 2, the process would be the same,
with the goal of finding the maximum variance over a hyperplane with a
number of dimensions determined by the number of prey on which the
consumer is preferentially targeting. Because specializing on multiple
prey does not introduce anything conceptually unique, we consider only
the case of a single-prey specialist.

The Dynamics of Isotopic Incorporation {#the-dynamics-of-isotopic-incorporation .unnumbered}
--------------------------------------

We have established a framework for analytically calculating the
distribution of isotope values that characterizes a consumer’s diet,
composed of multiple, isotopically distinct prey. The dietary behavior
of the consumer is a function of a single Dirichlet distribution, which
is assumed not to change over time, although we will relax this
assumption in the next section. Over long timescales the dietary
distribution of the consumer is static, with a fixed mean and variance.
Over short timescales, the consumer’s diet varies as Eq. [eqDirVar],
while its final isotopic distribution has a variability emerging from
the combined effects of the Dirichlet and the mixed Normal distribution
describing the prey mixing space (Eq. [eqVarZ]).

As the consumer acquires and consumes its prey, the isotopic composition
of its diet is incorporated into its tissues. The timescale of
physiological incorporation is based on the turnover rate of consumer
tissues, which on the fast end can occur within days to weeks (e.g.
blood plasma), and on the slow end occur over years (e.g. bone)
[@Tieszen:1983ij], and can be estimated via controlled feeding studies
[@Kurle:2009ch; @Bearhop:2010db; @Kim:2012kc]. Although the
physiological details are not well understood, isotopic incorporation
can be modeled using either single- or multi-compartmental approaches
[@Cerling:2006kv; @delRio:2008bs]. In a single compartment framework,
isotope ratios are ingested with food, and directly incorporated into
consumer tissues at a tissue-specific rate. In multiple compartment
frameworks, it is assumed that incorporation occurs over multiple body
pools, the turnover of each potentially occurring at different rates.
Though an assumption of multi-compartmental incorporation can provide
better statistical fit with experimental data
[@Cerling:2006kv; @Kurle:2009ch; @Carleton:2008cq], the physiological
processes that drive incorporation of isotope ratios from one
compartment to the other are not well understood [@delRio:2008bs], and
for many tissues single-compartment models fit as well or better than
multi-compartment models [@Kurle:2009ch].

In this next section, we assume that the ingested isotope ratios are
incorporated into consumer body tissues directly, moderated by the rate
of incorporation $\lambda$, which is treated as a free parameter. Here
we consider only a single compartment model, such that isotope ratios
are directly shuttled to consumer tissues at rate $\lambda$; we note,
however, that functions for multi-compartment models could be used
instead, though we do not expect large qualitative differences in
results [cf. Fig. 1 in @delRio:2008bs]. For simplicity, we assume that
time is scaled such that a single time step corresponds to a single
foraging bout. Moreover, we assume that the consumer is incorporating
prey of smaller size than itself, such that $ 0 < \lambda < 1$. Thus, we
aim to determine the isotopic composition of the consumer $X_c$ as a
function of its diet, the isotopic mixing space, and $\lambda$. We note
1) that the isotopic composition of the consumer could represent its
carbon ($\delta^{13}{\rm C}$) or nitrogen ($\delta^{15}{\rm N}$) isotope
value, and our proceeding derivations work equivalently for both, and 2)
that all trophic discrimination factors are assumed to have been
accounted for, such that $X_c$ directly reflects the consumer’s diet. In
a completely deterministic framework, the isotopic composition of the
consumer over time $t$ can be written as an ordinary differential
equation, where

$$\label{eqODE}
\frac{\rm d}{\rm dt} X_c(t) = \lambda \sum_{i=1}^N p_i \mu_i - \lambda X_c(t).$$

However, we must also take into account the stochastic effects described
in the previous section, including the variation associated with the
consumer’s diet and the isotopic variation associated with each prey. We
account for these stochastic effects by describing changes in the
consumer’s isotopic distribution with the stochastic differential
equation

$$\label{eqSDE}
{\rm d}X_c(t) = \lambda\left({\rm E}\{Z\}{\rm dt} + \sqrt{{\rm V}\{Z\}}{\rm dW}\right) - \lambda X_c(t){\rm dt}.$$

where ${\rm dW}$ is the increment of Brownian motion. This stochastic
differential equation describes an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, which is
a stochastic process that has a steady state variance around the mean
[@Mangel:2006wa]. Because the time interval ${\rm dt}$ is infinitesimal
at the continuous limit, the consumer’s isotopic distribution will have
a Normal distribution. In this case, if the initial isotopic values of
the consumer at time $t=0$ is $X_c(0)$, the expectation and variability
of $X_c$ at time $t$ are

$$\begin{aligned}
  \begin{split}
    \label{eqEVar}
{\rm E}\{X_c(t)\} &= {\rm E}\{Z\} + (X_c(0) - {\rm E}\{Z\}){\rm e}^{-\lambda t},\\
{\rm V}\{X_c(t)\} &= \frac{\lambda {\rm V}\{Z\}}{2}\left(1 - {\rm e}^{-2\lambda t}\right).
\end{split}\end{aligned}$$

where ${\rm E}\{Z\}$ and ${\rm V}\{Z\}$ are as defined in Eqns. [eqEZ]
and [eqVarZ]. One can observe that as $t$ increases, the exponential
part of ${\rm E}\{X_c(t)\}$ and ${\rm V}\{X_c(t)\}$ go to zero, such
that ${\rm E}\{X_c(t)\} \to {\rm E}\{Z\}$, and
${\rm V}\{X_c(t)\} \to \lambda{\rm V}\{Z\}/2$. In other words, the
expectation of the consumer’s isotopic distribution will equilibrate to
that of its diet, while its variance will always be less than the
variance of its diet by a factor of $\lambda/2$. Variance decreases as
the rate of incorporation decreases due to the consumer averaging its
isotopic value over more prey (because the tissue is turning over more
slowly), and this serves to average out fluctuations in the consumer’s
diet.

Our static model is defined by a consumer’s diet that varies
instantaneously over a given parameterization of $f_Z(z)$. This is
relevant for organisms that have a consistently varying diet over time,
however most organisms have diets that undergo large, qualitative
changes over longer periods time. In such cases, the Dirichlet
distribution that characterizes diet during one small temporal interval
will be different than the Dirichlet distribution characterizing diet
during another interval far apart in time. Such a shift might be due to
seasonal, ontogenetic, or demographic changes in the consumer or its
prey base over the course of months, or years, depending on the
timescale of interest. In the following section, we will relax the
assumption that diet is characterized by a single Dirichlet
distribution, thus generalizing our formulation of consumer isotopic
dynamics as a function of time.

The random variable of interest is now $Z(t)$, which is the trajectory
defining the isotopic distribution of the consumer’s diet over time.
Solving for $X(t)$, we find

$$\begin{aligned}
  \label{eqEVarZt}
{\rm E}\{X(t)\} = X(0){\rm e}^{-\lambda t} + \lambda{\rm e}^{-\lambda t} \int_{s=0}^t {\rm e}^{\lambda s} {\rm E}\{Z(s)\}{\rm d}s, \nonumber \\
{\rm V}\{X(t)\} = \lambda^2 {\rm e}^{-2\lambda t} \int_{s=0}^t {\rm e}^{2\lambda s} {\rm V}\{Z(s)\} {\rm d}s.\end{aligned}$$

By defining the temporal dynamics of diet $Z(t)$ and the incorporation
rate $\lambda$, we can thus analytically determine the isotopic mean and
variance of the consumer’s tissues.

Results
=======

We have provided an analytical solution for the mean and variance of the
consumer’s isotope distribution as a function of its diet and the prey
mixing space. By formulating these solutions in terms of consumer
generalization and specialization (Eq. [eqVarZs]), we make three
observations: 1) the variance of the isotopic distribution of the
consumer’s diet, ${\rm V}\{Z\}$, which scales to its isotopic niche
width, is concave parabolic (Fig. [figvar]); 2) whether and to what
extent ${\rm V}\{Z\}$ demonstrates measurable nonlinearity depends in
part on the geometry of the mixing space; 3) the peak variance over the
generalization-specialization continuum is the consumer’s maximum
isotopic niche width. This point may or may not exist at a value
intermediate to an obligate generalist and obligate specialist.

The nonlinear nature of the consumer’s isotopic niche width as a
function of its specialization on certain prey (or combinations of prey)
is driven almost entirely by the geometry of the prey mixing space. One
can gain some intuitive understanding of this nonlinearity by
considering the following example, illustrated in Fig. [figvar]. In a
three-prey system, where all prey have equal isotopic means and
variances, a consumer that ranges from generalization on all three prey
to specialization on a single prey will likewise have isotopically
equivalent diets. As the mean isotope value of the targeted prey is
moved away from the others, such that its offset from the mixing space
centroid [the center of the mixing space;
@Layman:2007vi; @Newsome:WhhVfocb] is increased, the variance function
displays increasing nonlinearity. For a skewed mixing space, where one
prey source has a very different isotope composition than the rest [e.g.
a mixing space consisting of terrestrial foods vs. a marine subsidy;
@Newsome:2004p992], if the consumer incorporates isotopes from all three
sources in equal proportions (a generalist), it will have relatively
higher isotopic variance than if its prey exhibited a less skewed mixing
space geometry. The skewness of the mixing space increases with the
offset of the targeted prey from the mixing space centroid as shown in
Fig. [figvar]. As the consumer integrates this isotopically unique prey
in greater proportions, the heterogeneity of incorporated isotope values
will increase, serving to increase the consumer’s isotopic variability.
The isotopic variability will then decline as the consumer begins
specializing on the atypical prey, and if it is consuming this prey
exclusively, the isotopic variability of its diet will reflect the
isotopic variability of its prey exactly. The concave parabolic nature
of the isotopic variability of the consumer’s diet can thus be explained
by heterogeneous incorporation of isotope ratios over an skewed, or
asymmetric, mixing space.

Understanding what dietary strategy or mixing space geometry can
maximize the isotopic niche width of the consumer’s diet will serve to
help ecologists determine what mechanisms - ecological or statistical -
may be driving patterns in isotope data, or whether these mechanisms can
be decoupled at all. Our analytical solution for peak variance over
dietary specialization on prey $k$, $\hat s_k$, reveals that maximum
isotopic niche width can, but doesn’t always, fall in $s_k \in [1/n,1]$,
with bounds denoting exclusive prey generalization or specialization,
respectively. If the peak lies outside of this region, changes in
isotopic variance as specialization on a targeted prey is increased will
appear monotonic or even linear.

Although the specific nature of $\hat s_k$ will depend strongly on
mixing space geometry, we can elucidate certain key attributes that will
determine the general nature of where this value falls. For mixing space
geometries where the targeted prey has higher than average variance,
$\hat s_k$ will tend to lie towards prey specialization ($s_k>0.5$),
however the offset of the mean value of the targeted prey from the
mixing space centroid will quickly push $\hat s_k$ to $s_k \to 0.5$
(Fig. [figspecvar]A,B). In contrast, if the targeted prey has lower than
average variance, $\hat s_k$ will tend to lie towards prey
generalization ($s_k < 0.5$; Fig. [figspecvar]B,C). As before, if the
offset of the targeted prey’s mean value increases, $\hat s_k \to 0.5$.
In both cases, if the mean value for the targeted prey is close to the
mixing space centroid, the maximum isotopic variance for the consumer
could lie in any region.

Temporally variable diets {#temporally-variable-diets .unnumbered}
-------------------------

The equilibrial solution to our stochastic differential equation (Eq.
[eqEVar]) reveals that the isotopic variability of the consumer scales
to diet as a factor of $\lambda/2$. As the incorporation rate decreases,
such that the turnover time is longer, the isotopic variability of the
consumer declines. This is due to the consumer averaging its tissues
over a greater number of foraging bouts. Moreover, we observe that as
the consumer transitions from some initial isotopic state $X_c(0)$ to
diet, the variance of the consumer’s isotopic values equilibrate twice
as fast as the mean value.

If the consumer’s diet is itself variable over time, we do not expect
its isotopic composition to equilibrate as it would in a controlled
feeding study (Eq. [eqEVarZt]). For example, the consumer might adopt
one diet during the wet season, and another during the dry season, such
that it oscillates between the two throughout the year. We consider a
composite diet with an isotopic distribution
$\mathbb{Z}(t) \sim f_{\mathbb{Z}}(t)$ that dynamically oscillates
between two subdiets, which we will refer to as ‘seasonal diets’ with
frequency $\omega$. We note that $1/\omega$ in this context corresponds
to the ‘dietary correlation time’ of @Fink:2012eg. Seasonal diets have
random variables $Z_1$ and $Z_2$, each distributed according to Eq.
[eqfZ], though they have different underlying Dirichlet distributions –
encoding which prey the consumer targets during each season with
frequency distributions $f_{\bm P_1}$ and $f_{\bm P_2}$ – while the
isotopic distributions of prey are assumed to be constant over time. We
can thus describe the composite diet as a mix of the seasonal diets
characterized by weights that oscillate over time, and this determines
the contribution of each seasonal dietary strategy to the whole. We
define $\mathcal{U}(t)$ to be the proportional contribution of $Z_1$ to
the composite diet $\mathbb{Z}(t)$ over time, such that it can vary
between zero (no incorporation of $Z_1$) to unity (complete reliance on
$Z_1$). The frequency distribution for the composite diet is thus

$$f_{\mathbb{Z}(t)} = \mathcal{U}(t) f_{Z_1} + (1-\mathcal{U}(t)) f_{Z_2}. $$

If we do not specify the type of oscillation that drives changes in diet
over time, the expectation and variance for the isotopic distribution of
the composite diet over time are thus

$$\begin{aligned}
  \label{eqZtgen}
  \begin{split}
    {\rm E}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\} &= \mathcal{U}(t){\rm E}\{Z_1\} + (1-\mathcal{U}(t)){\rm E}\{Z_2\}, \\
    {\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\} &= \mathcal{U}(t){\rm V}\{Z_1\} + (1-\mathcal{U}(t)){\rm V}\{Z_2\} + \mathcal{U}(t)(1-\mathcal{U}(t))\left({\rm E}\{Z_1\} - {\rm E}\{Z_2\}\right)^2,
  \end{split}\end{aligned}$$

where the isotopic mean of the composite diet is averaged over both
seasonal diets, weighted by the proportional inclusion of each. In the
wet/dry season example, the consumer could either shift gradually from
its wet season diet to its dry season diet if $\mathcal{U}(t)$ is
smooth, or shift abruptly if $\mathcal{U}(t)$ is discontinuous.

Dietary transitions between seasons tend to be gradual, even if the
start/end of a given season is abrupt
[@Thompson:1995co; @CodronSAJWR2007]. To understand how a temporally
oscillating diet affects the isotopic variance of the composite diet, we
consider the smooth oscillation
$\mathcal{U}(t) = 1/2 + 1/2\sin(\omega t)$, such that the proportional
contribution of $Z_1$ oscillates with frequency $\omega$ (Fig.
[figvarZt]A). Substituting $\mathcal{U}(t)$ into Eq. [eqZtgen] provides
the solution to a sinusoidally varying diet, with expectation and
variance

$$\begin{aligned}
  \begin{split}
  \label{eqZtsin}
    {\rm E}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\} &= \frac{{\rm E}\{Z_1\} + {\rm E}\{Z_2\}}{2} + \frac{{\rm E}\{Z_1\} - {\rm E}\{Z_2\}}{2}\sin(\omega t), \\
    {\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\} &= \overbrace{\frac{{\rm V}\{Z_1\} + {\rm V}\{Z_2\}}{2} + \frac{1}{2} \left(\frac{{\rm E}\{Z_1\} - {\rm E}\{Z_2\}}{2}\right)^2}^{\alpha_{\rm V}} \\
    &+ \overbrace{\frac{{\rm V}\{Z_1\} - {\rm V}\{Z_2\}}{2}}^{\beta_{\rm V}}\sin(\omega t) + \overbrace{\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{{\rm E}\{Z_1\} - {\rm E}\{Z_2\}}{2}\right)^2}^{\gamma_{\rm V}}\sin\left(2\omega t + \frac{\pi}{2}\right).
  \end{split}\end{aligned}$$

where we have combined the non-oscillating components of the variance
into three parameters $\alpha_{\rm V}$, $\beta_{\rm V}$, and
$\gamma_{\rm V}$ for notational efficiency.

We gain three key insights from the solution for the expectation and
variance of the composite diet. 1) As would be expected, the central
tendency of the composite diet is the average of the mean values for
each subdiet, while the amplitude of oscillations is driven entirely by
the difference in the mean values of each subdiet; 2) the time-averaged
variance (denoted by $\langle \cdot \rangle_t$) is simply
$\langle {\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\} \rangle_t = \alpha_{\rm V}$, which is
only impacted by the average variance between the seasonal diets and the
difference in the mean isotope values between the seasonal diets (Fig.
[figvarcont]); 3) the oscillating component shows that the composite
dietary variance has a modified frequency, as well as an offset, meaning
that the maximal variance of the consumer’s composite diet generally
occurs during the transition from one diet to the other (Fig.
[figvarZt]B). Together, these results reveal that if the consumer’s diet
is varying continuously over time between two seasonal diets, both the
averaged variance, as well as the difference in the mean isotope values
of the seasonal diets – directly reflecting the heterogeneity of prey
mixing space geometry – will serve to increase the time-averaged
variance of the consumer’s diet, and by extension the isotopic variance
of the consumer itself.

Less intuitively, we observe that the consumer’s peak variance, or niche
width, as measured by the variance of its composite diet, occurs not
during the exclusive adoption of its subdiets, but during the transition
between the two, and this peak variance is driven exclusively by the
difference in means between seasonal diets. As the seasonal diets become
more heterogeneous in isotopic space, the greater the consumer’s peak
variance during the transition, and this occurs because it is sampling
between two dietary strategies that are isotopically distinct. We can
directly observe this by considering a transition between two diets with
a) different means and the same variances, and b) the same means and
different variances. In the former case, the peak variance of the
composite diet occurs during the transition (Fig [figvarZt]B); in the
latter case, because the diets have the same mean isotope value, the
peak occurs not during the transition, but when the consumer adopts the
diet with the greater variance, which in our example would occur at the
height of the season (Fig [figvarZt]C).

The isotopic composition of a consumer $X_c(t)$ during a single dietary
shift is governed by a single timescale of physiological origin: the
rate of incorporation $\lambda$ (Eq. [eqEVar]). However, a seasonally
shifting diet that is driven by oscillating foraging strategies
introduces an additional ecological timescale that will affect $X_c(t)$,
determined by the frequency of diet switching $\omega$ (Fig.
[figxcsin]A). Depending on the turnover rate of the tissue of interest
and how often the consumer shifts its diet, the ratio of these
timescales $\omega/\lambda$ will impact how the isotopic mean and
variance of the consumer changes over time. For the case of a
sinusoidally varying diet, we can solve for $X_c(t)$ directly, such that

$$\begin{aligned}
  \label{eqXsin}
  \begin{split}
    {\rm V}\{X_c(t \gg 0)\} = &\alpha_{\rm V}\frac{\lambda}{2} + \beta_{\rm V}\frac{\lambda^2}{\sqrt{(2\lambda)^2 + \omega^2}}\sin\left(\omega t -\theta_1\right) \\
    &+ \gamma_{\rm V}\frac{\lambda^2}{2\sqrt{\lambda^2 + \omega^2}}\sin\left(2\omega t + \theta_2\right).
  \end{split}\end{aligned}$$

where the offsets $\theta_1$ and $\theta_2$ are
$ \tan^{-1}(\omega/2\lambda)$ and $ \tan^{-1}(\lambda/\omega)$,
respectively. As in the case of a single diet $Z$, the time-averaged
variance is scaled by the incorporation rate as
$\alpha_{\rm V}\lambda/2$. Moreover, we observe that the consumer’s
isotopic composition lags behind changes in diet, such that an isotopic
shift in the consumer’s tissues is observed after the actual foraging
shift. This lag involves both $\theta_1$ and $\theta_2$, however these
offsets play different roles in contributing to the lag for different
mixing space geometries. When the isotopic means of the seasonal diets
are similar, the lag is mostly due to $\theta_1$; when the means are
different and the variances are similar, the lag is mostly due to
$\theta_2$; when both the isotopic means and variances of the seasonal
diets are different, both contribute significantly to the lag.

As shown in Fig. [figxcsin], we observe that 1) the lag between the
transition and the peak variance of the consumer increases with
decreasing $\lambda$ (i.e. increasing timescale of incorporation), and
2) the amplitude of the variance of $X_c(t)$ decreases with increasing
$\omega$ (i.e. decreasing timescale of ecological switching). The first
result is not surprising, as it mirrors the role of $\lambda$ in the
static diet example. The second result is less intuitive: in words, as
the consumer shifts its diet more frequently, there is still a peak
variance during dietary transitions, though with diminishing amplitude,
and this would make it more difficult to measure (Fig [figxcsin]B). This
is due to the consumer slowly integrating isotopes into its tissues from
both diets, thus averaging across diet-switching events, thus dampening
fluctuations. Accordingly, the decrease in the amplitude of isotopic
variance of the consumer’s tissue is an averaging effect, where the
timescale of incorporation is much larger than the timescale of dietary
switching.

Discussion
==========

We have established a forward-integration approach towards understanding
how the isotopic distribution of an individual consumer evolves due to
ecological, physiological, and geometric factors. Our framework
introduces mechanistic links between the ecological foraging dynamics of
a consumer, the physiological constraints that dictate incorporation,
and the more abstract effects of mixing space geometry. We focus our
efforts on building an analytical framework to understand how the
isotopic variance of an individual – its isotopic niche width – changes
as a function of different foraging strategies that are both
probabilistic and dynamic over time. We consider two foraging scenarios:
1) <span>*static strategy*</span>: probabilistic consumption of multiple
prey, the proportions of which are on average constant over time, and 2)
<span>*dynamic strategy*</span>: probabilistic consumption of multiple
prey whose relative contribution to consumer’s diet varies over time.
The former example is most relevant for consumers inhabiting
environments where resource availability is stable (reliable), whereas
the latter is more appropriate for consumers that prey switch between
two qualitatively different subdiets.

Our primary findings concern whether and to what extent the peak
isotopic variance of the consumer, or maximum isotopic niche width, is
realized under different, but definable, conditions with respect to
static and dynamic foraging scenarios. When the consumer exhibits a
static foraging strategy, the isotopic variance of its diet is tied
directly to its prey specialization and the skewness of the isotopic
mixing space. We show that as the mixing space becomes more skewed,
there is an increasing likelihood that the peak variance will occur at
intermediate specialization (where a single prey accounts for ca. 50% of
the consumer’s diet; Figs. [figvar],[figspecvar]). When the consumer
exhibits a dynamic, yet smoothly varying foraging strategy, we show that
the peak variance occurs during the transition from one diet to another,
and is offset by a lag that is a function of both its incorporation rate
and the timescale over which it shifts between diets (Fig. [figvarZt]).
Below we show that these findings are relevant beyond theory by
examining an empirical sea otter mixing space, and discuss areas where
additional realism can be incorporated to gain further ecological
insight into the isotopic niche.

The isotopic niche: generalization vs. specialization {#the-isotopic-niche-generalization-vs.-specialization .unnumbered}
-----------------------------------------------------

To demonstrate the empirical relevance of the nonlinear nature of
${\rm V}\{Z\}$, we examine a prey-rich marine system near San Simeon and
Monterey Bay, California, composed of nine invertebrate species commonly
consumed by sea otters [@Tinker:2008tp]. In this system, all potential
prey resources have unique isotopic means and variances (Fig.
[figsomix]), including multiple species of sea urchins and crab, clams,
abalone, mussels, and snails. We can investigate how alternatively
targeting each prey species alters the isotopic variance of a sea
otter’s diet across different degrees of specialization by modifying the
underlying Dirichlet distribution (i.e. by increasing $a_k$ for each
species individually, while holding $a_{i \neq k} = 1$; Fig.
[figottervar]A). We determined the existence of strong nonlinearity in
the isotopic variance of diet for 44% of prey species (Fig.
[figottervar]B). For targeted prey exhibiting nonlinear variance
(including mussels, snails, purple sea urchins, and kelp crabs), the
maximum isotopic variance was found in the region $s \leq 0.5$.

The message that we take from the sea otter example is relatively
straightforward: for a given prey mixing space, a consumer’s dietary
variability – where the consumer’s tissues scale in proportion to its
diet by a factor of $\lambda/2$ – will be a function of both mixing
space geometry, as well as its dietary strategy, and these effects can
be confounding. Despite this, we are able to establish certain
predictions for the consumer’s isotopic niche width as a function of
diet: as the consumer incorporates moderate amounts of isotopically
unique prey into its diet, its variance will be expected to increase.
Knowledge of the interplay between mixing space geometry and a
consumer’s dietary strategy, and its consequent effect on the isotopic
variance of diet, is particularly important for characterizing consumers
based exclusively on isotopic variance. For example, without knowledge
of these relationships, a highly variable consumer might be interpreted
as a dietary generalist, whereas it might be able to achieve a similarly
high or higher variance by moderately focusing its foraging activities
on a single prey species with an isotopic distribution far from the
mixing space centroid.

The isotopic niche over time {#the-isotopic-niche-over-time .unnumbered}
----------------------------

We gain additional insight into the factors influencing consumer
isotopic variability by considering dynamic diets, where the consumer
oscillates between different foraging strategies over time. We
considered a simple sinusoidal oscillation for $\mathcal{U}(t)$, the
proportional contribution of diet 1 to the composite diet over time
$\mathbb{Z}(t)$. The subdiets from which the composite diet is composed
can be thought of as ‘seasonal diets’. Our analytical results showed
that the peak variance of the composite diet occurred during the
transition between seasonal diets. Importantly, this is not due to any
particular mixing space geometry, but a general result that will always
occur, as long as the diets are isotopically distinct (each with a
unique mean and variance), and the transition is smooth such that a
consumer gradually shifts between different diets, as opposed to an
abrupt, discontinuous diet switch.

Although the peak variance of $\mathbb{Z}(t)$ is entirely due to
ecological diet shifts rather than mixing space geometry, the latter
does play a role in determining the mean value (time average) of
${\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\}$. The effect of mixing space geometry on the
time-averaged variance of the composite diet is determined by
$\alpha_{\rm V}$, which is a function of 1) the average variance of the
subdiets from which $\mathbb{Z}$ is composed, and 2) the mean difference
between the two subdiets (see Eq. [eqXsin]). As either of these factors
increase, the average variance of the composite diet increases, setting
the baseline from which the peak dietary variance fluctuates (Fig.
[figvarcont]). We also observed that as the frequency of dietary
transitions increased relative to the rate at which the consumer
integrates dietary isotopes into its tissues, the consumer’s isotopic
variance exhibited lower amplitude as it fluctuated between the
different variances of its diet (Fig. [figxcsin]). This occurs because
the greater transition frequencies serve to average variance of the two
diets within its tissues. @Fink:2012eg found a similar dynamic when they
derived an analytical solution for the variance of a consumer population
transitioning between two prey.

An interesting observation that we gain from exploring a sinusoidal
dietary shift is that the variance peak observed during dietary
transitions is dependent on the smoothness of the transition. In fact,
it is the transition mid-point, at $\mathcal{U}(t) = 0.5$, where the
composite diet is pulled equally from each seasonal diet, and this
serves to maximize the isotopic heterogeneity of the mixture (the
consumer). Thus, when foraging strategies are dynamic, it is the point
of maximum isotopic heterogeneity that results in peak isotopic variance
of the diet. This is analogous to the cause of peak dietary variance in
the static example, where specialization on prey resources with greater
isotopic offsets from the mixing space centroid maximizes isotopic
heterogeneity, resulting in a variance peak.

An extreme alternative to a smooth dietary transition would be one that
is discontinuous, as depicted by a step-function, or square wave (Fig.
[figsawtooth]A). Such an instantaneous dietary shift is not ecologically
unrealistic; e.g. both brown bears and gray wolves abruptly shift their
diet to salmon during salmon runs
[@Hilderbrand:1999kq; @Darimont:2002ex; @Levi:2012ir], as do predators
on other prey populations exhibiting localized boom-bust dynamics such
as locusts, krill, jellyfish, and sardines
[@Dawson:2008hj; @Atkinson:2014jm]. Because there is no point during a
sharp, discontinuous transition that serves to mix subdiets, the
variance of the composite diet does not peak in response. Instead, both
the expectation and the variance of the composite diet incorporates this
step function behavior, transitioning to reflect the shifts between
different diets. Because the isotope ratios associated with diet are
incorporated gradually into the consumer’s tissues, both the mean and
the variance of the consumer will adopt a sawtooth-like dynamic (Fig.
[figsawtooth]A,B), where they begin to asymptote to the expectation and
variance of the subdiets, but are reverted abruptly at the dietary
switch. We note that, as in the static example, the isotopic variance of
the consumer approaches the variance of its diet twice as fast as its
expectation (cf. Eq. [eqEVar]).

Population dynamics and state-dependent foraging {#population-dynamics-and-state-dependent-foraging .unnumbered}
------------------------------------------------

We presented a simple dynamic-switching framework, where a consumer
oscillates between two different diets over time to explore its effect
on its isotopic niche. In reality, a consumer’s dietary strategy might
be shifting constantly over time, in response to a constantly changing
environment. One potentially important extension of our framework could
incorporate a population dynamic underlying the availability of
potential resources (and by extension the consumer’s diet) in a
continuous, more complex, and ecologically justified manner. Our
original formulation of the Dirichlet distribution that describes the
consumer’s diet was established on the relationship between the random
variables describing the proportional contribution of prey to diet
($P_i = p_i$) and its encounter rate ($\Psi_i = \psi_i$), where
$p_i = \psi_i/\sum_j \psi_j$, and this was assumed to have a static
distribution over time. However, if the prey are fluctuating in
accordance to an underlying population dynamic (for example, determined
by a system of differential equations), the encounter rate of each prey
would itself be a function of time. By relating the expectation and/or
variance of $\Psi_i$ to the density of prey, the parameterization of the
Dirichlet can be directly coupled to changes in population densities,
thus mechanistically incorporating population dynamics into predictions
of a consumer’s isotopic composition.

Furthermore, the relationship between $p_i$ and $\psi_i$ explicitly
assumes passive foraging between the consumer and its potential prey,
and this holds for our original static (single diet) example, our
shifting diet example, and would hold for the example above where the
Dirichlet changes in response to an underlying population dynamic.
Although this is not a bad starting point, and may be a perfectly
reasonable assumption for a filter feeder that consumes resources
indiscriminately, it is not a reliable assumption for most organisms
that may rank prey based on intrinsic traits (e.g., energetic yield,
handling/processing time). Instead, a more complex relationship between
$p_i$ and the attributes of the consumer’s prey, and perhaps attributes
of the consumer itself, could be used to determine the parameterization
of the Dirichlet distribution defining the consumer’s diet over time.

For example, our framework implicitly assumes that there is a steady
state influx of prey biomass to match the metabolic expenses of the
consumer. In other words, prey are chosen in accordance to the Dirichlet
distribution, but it is assumed that each foraging bout contributes
equally to the consumer’s diet, and that the consumer always finds a
meal. In reality, the success of a given foraging bout is not certain,
and there is some risk of not finding any prey at all [@Creel:2008p838];
in such a case, the consumer would resort to metabolizing its own
tissues [@Doucett:1999bz; @VanderZanden:2001p2449]. Such a dynamic would
directly impact the rate of incorporation by altering the proportional
contribution of newly consumed isotopes to the turnover of the
consumer’s body tissues. Moreover, the foraging decisions that a
consumer makes are often a function of its energetic state
[@Barnett:2007er; @Yeakel:2013hi], which changes as it successfully or
unsuccessfully finds and acquires its prey [@Mangel:1986um]. Such
state-dependent foraging may be difficult to treat analytically, but
could be explored numerically, and this approach would be useful for
hypothesis testing, particularly when one is interested in comparing the
effects of different foraging strategies on the statistical properties
of the consumer’s isotopic composition.

From individuals to populations {#from-individuals-to-populations .unnumbered}
-------------------------------

Finally, the framework that we have presented has focused entirely on
the individual, in particular on how the isotopic variance of an
individual consumer changes in response to different ecological and
physiological factors as well as aspects of the isotope mixing space it
utilizes. Most ecological applications using stable isotope analysis
operate at the level of the population, although there is a rich
literature of efforts that use stable isotope analysis to understand
sources of isotopic variation at the level of the individual
[@Koch:1995vj; @Matthews:2004hw; @Sponheimer:2006fj; @Post:2008ki; @Newsome:2009tn; @Yeakel:2009hz; @Newsome:WhhVfocb; @Hopkins:2015ip].

Understanding how variance percolates from prey to the individual
consumer is a necessary first step for understanding sources of isotopic
variation at population level. Such considerations quickly become
complex, as there are scenarios when the isotopic variance of an
individual is or is not closely coupled to the variance of the
population. For example, if individuals within a population have similar
means and - for simplicity - equal variances, then the variance of the
population will scale linearly with the variance of the individuals
(Fig. [figindpopvar]A,B). This relationship highlights an important
message: when individuality is low, the variance of the population is
entirely explained by the variance of the individuals; this means that
the results that we have presented for a consumer individual are
expected to scale directly to that of the population. However, if the
individuals within a population have very different means and relatively
small variances, then there will not be a significant relationship
between population-level and individual-level variation (Fig.
[figindpopvar]C,D). We can imagine different individual-population
relationships occurring within a 2-D state-space defined by
individuality on one axis and specialization on the other. At the
extremes, a population could consist of 1) obligate specialists with low
individuality where all individuals specialize on the same resource, 2)
obligate specialists with high individuality where all individuals
specialize on different resources, and 3) obligate generalists with low
individuality where all individuals are generalists; an obligate
generalist with high individuality cannot exist in this context. These
potential end-members are discussed at length in @Bearhop:2004im and
@Fink:2012eg. As we have seen in the above analyses, the variation of
individuals is driven by a complex interplay between mixing space
geometry, consumer foraging behaviors, and physiological incorporation.
How these different population-level end-members might shape both
individual and population-level isotopic distributions is an important
question, though the answers will likely harbor additional complexities.
For example, isotopically similar individuals with low variances imply
that all individuals are consuming similar things, in similar
quantities, such that individuality is low, though our results show that
low isotopic variance need not indicate specialization or generalization
*per se* (cf. Figs [figvar],[figottervar]). Accounting for individual
variation in dietary proclivities over time is bound to complicate
interpretation further.

Conclusions {#conclusions .unnumbered}
-----------

There are many sources of variation that contribute to a consumer’s
isotopic composition. These sources include the geometry of the prey
mixing space, the foraging behaviors of the consumers, as well as
temporal changes in the environment that might alter the ability of the
consumer to find, acquire, and consume its prey. Along with
physiological incorporation of isotopes into consumer tissues, these
factors serve to drive the temporal evolution of the isotopic
distribution, or isotopic niche, of the consumer. By coupling the
isotopic variance of this distribution to mechanistic relationships
between the consumer and its diet, as well as the isotopic mixing space
of the system, we have presented a systematic exploration of the factors
that cause the isotopic niche to both expand and contract. Incorporating
the effects of population dynamics and/or more complex foraging
strategies will enable hypothesis testing of different ecological
mechanisms to generate the isotopic distributions that are observed in
nature. We hope that such a forward-integrating approach, alongside the
use of tools such as mixing models to back-calculate dietary
composition, will serve to expand and enhance the ecological
interpretation of isotopic data.

Disclosure/Conflict-of-Interest Statement {#disclosureconflict-of-interest-statement .unnumbered}
=========================================

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

Author Contributions {#author-contributions .unnumbered}
====================

JDY, UB, EAES, and SDN conceived the idea. JDY and UB designed the
statistical framework and conducted the analyses. EAES and SDN
contributed empirical data. All authors contributed equally to drafting
and writing the manuscript.

Acknowledgments {#acknowledgments .unnumbered}
===============

We thank C.E. Chow, A. Jakle, Z.D. Sharp, F.A. Smith, and the Center for
Stable Isotopes Brown Bag Symposium at the University of New Mexico for
helpful comments and discussions that greatly increased the quality of
this manuscript.

*Funding* J.D. Yeakel was supported by the Omidyar Postdoctoral
Fellowship at the Santa Fe Institute.

References {#references .unnumbered}
==========

<span>51</span> [1]<span>\#1</span> urlstyle[1]<span>doi:\#1</span>

[1] [1]<span> </span> [2]

> <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Key:</span> \#1\
> <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Annotation:</span> \#2

Ainsworth, C. H., Kaplan, I. C., Levin, P. S., and Mangel, M. (2010). .
*Ecol. Appl.* 20, 2188–2202

Ara<span>ú</span>jo, M. S., Bolnick, D. I., and Layman, C. A. (2011). .
*Ecol. Lett.* 14, 948–958

Ara<span>ú</span>jo, M. S., Bolnick, D. I., Machado, G., Giaretta,
A. A., and dos Reis, S. F. (2007). . *Oecologia* 152, 643–654

Ara<span>ú</span>jo, M. S., Bolnick, D. I., Martinelli, L. A., Giaretta,
A. A., and dos Reis, S. F. (2009). . *J. Anim. Ecol.* 78, 848–856

Bearhop, S., Adams, C. E., Waldron, S., Fuller, R. A., and Macleod, H.
(2004). . *J. Anim. Ecol.* 73, 1007–1012

Bolnick, D., Svanback, R., Ara<span>ú</span>jo, M., and Persson, L.
(2007). . *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104, 10075

Bolnick, D. I., Amarasekare, P., Ara<span>ú</span>jo, M. S.,
B<span>ü</span>rger, R., Levine, J. M., Novak, M., et al. (2011). .
*Trends Ecol. Evol.* 26, 183–192

Carleton, S. A., Kelly, L., Anderson-Sprecher, R., and
Mart<span>í</span>nez del Rio, C. (2008). *Rapid Commun. Mass Sp.* 22,
3008–3014

Cerling, T. E., Ayliffe, L. K., Dearing, M. D., Ehleringer, J. R.,
Passey, B. H., Podlesak, D. W., et al. (2006). . *Oecologia* 151,
175–189

Chesson, J. (1983). . *Ecology* 64, 1297

Clark, C. W. and Mangel, M. (2000). *<span>Dynamic state variable models
in ecology: methods and applications</span>* (Oxford University Press,
USA)

Fink, P., Reichwaldt, E. S., Harrod, C., and Rossberg, A. G. (2012). .
*Oikos* 121, 1985–1994

Hilborn, R. and Mangel, M. (1997). *<span>The ecological detective:
Confronting models with data</span>* (Princeton: Princeton University
Press)

Hopkins, J. B. and Ferguson, J. M. (2012). *PLoS ONE* 7, e28478

Hopkins III, J. B. and Kurle, C. M. (2015). . *Methods Ecol Evol* , 1–12

Hutchinson, G. E. (1957). . In *Cold spring harbor symposium on
quantitative biology* (Concluding remarks)

Jackson, A. L., Inger, R., Parnell, A. C., and Bearhop, S. (2011). . *J.
Anim. Ecol.* 80, 595–602

Johnson, N. L. (1960). . *Biometrika* 47, 93

Kim, S. L., Mart<span>í</span>nez del Rio, C., Casper, D., and Koch,
P. L. (2012). *J. Exp. Biol.* 215, 2495–2500

Koch, P., Heisinger, J., Moss, C., Carlson, R., Fogel, M., and
Behrensmeyer, A. (1995). . *Science* 267, 1340

Kurle, C. M. (2009). . *Functional Ecology* 23, 733–744

Layman, C. A., Ara<span>ú</span>jo, M. S., Boucek, R.,
Hammerschlag-Peyer, C. M., Harrison, E., Jud, Z. R., et al. (2011). .
*Biological Reviews* , no–no

Layman, C. A., Quattrochi, J. P., Peyer, C. M., and Allgeier, J. E.
(2007). . *Ecol. Lett.* 10, 937–944

Lehmann, D., Mfune, J. K. E., Gewers, E., Brain, C., and Voigt, C. C.
(2015). . *Oecologia* , 1–14

Mangel, M. (2006). *<span>The theoretical biologist’s toolbox:
Quantitative methods for ecology and evolutionary biology</span>*
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Mangel, M. (2014). . *B. Math. Biol.* 77, 857–877

Mangel, M. and Clark, C. W. (1988). *<span>Dynamic modeling in
behavioral ecology</span>* (Princeton: Princeton University Press)

Mart<span>í</span>nez del Rio, C. and Anderson-Sprecher, R. (2008). .
*Oecologia* 156, 765–772

Mart<span>í</span>nez del Rio, C., Sabat, P., Anderson-Sprecher, R., and
Gonzalez, S. P. (2009). *Oecologia* 161, 149–159

Matthews, B. and Mazumder, A. (2004). . *Oecologia* 140, 361–371

Moore, J. W. and Semmens, B. X. (2008). . *Ecol. Lett.* 11, 470–480

Newsome, S., Yeakel, J. D., Wheatley, P. V., and Tinker, M. T. (2012). .
*J. Mammal.* 93, 329–341

Newsome, S. D., Martinez del Rio, C., Bearhop, S., and Phillips, D. L.
(2007). . *Front. Ecol. Environ.* 5, 429–436

Newsome, S. D., Tinker, M., Monson, D., Oftedal, O., Ralls, K.,
Staedler, M., et al. (2009). . *Ecology* 90, 961–974

Newsome, S. D., Tinker, M. T., Gill, V. A., Hoyt, Z. N., Doroff, A.,
Nichol, L., et al. (2015). . *Oecologia* , 1–15

Ogle, K., Tucker, C., and Cable, J. M. (2014). . *Ecol. Appl.* 24,
181–195

Parnell, A. C., Inger, R., Bearhop, S., and Jackson, A. L. (2010). .
*PLoS ONE* 5, e9672

Parnell, A. C., Phillips, D. L., Bearhop, S., Semmens, B. X., Ward,
E. J., Moore, J. W., et al. (2013). . *Environmetrics* 24, 387–399

Phillips, D. L. (2001). . *Oecologia* 127, 166–170

Phillips, D. L. and Gregg, J. W. (2003). . *Oecologia* 136, 261–269

Phillips, D. L. and Koch, P. (2002). . *Oecologia* 130, 114–125

Phillips, D. L., Newsome, S. D., and Gregg, J. W. (2005). . *Oecologia*
144, 520–527

Post, D. M. (2008). . *Ecology* 84, 1298–1310

Roughgarden, J. (1979). *<span>Theory of population genetics and
evolutionary ecology: an introduction.</span>* (New York: Macmillan)

Semmens, B. X., Ward, E. J., Moore, J. W., and Darimont, C. T. (2009). .
*PLoS ONE* 4, e6187

Sponheimer, M., Passey, B. H., de Ruiter, D. J., Guatelli-Steinberg, D.,
Cerling, T. E., and Lee-Thorp, J. A. (2006). . *Science* 314, 980–982

Tieszen, L. L., Boutton, T. W., Tesdahl, K. G., and Slade, N. A. (1983).
. *Oecologia* 57, 32–37

Tinker, M. T., Bentall, G., and Estes, J. A. (2008). . *Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA* 105, 560565

Yeakel, J. D., Dominy, N. J., Koch, P. L., and Mangel, M. (2014). .
*Evolution* 68, 190–203

Yeakel, J. D., Guimar<span>ã</span>es Jr, P. R., Bocherens, H., and
Koch, P. L. (2013). . *Proc. Roy. Soc. B* 280, 20130239–20130239

Yeakel, J. D., Patterson, B. D., Fox-Dobbs, K., Okumura, M., Cerling,
T., Moore, J., et al. (2009). . *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 106,
1904019043

![image](fig_var.jpg)

**[figvar] Figure .**<span> Variance of the isotopic distribution of a
consumer’s diet, ${\rm V}\{Z\}$, with respect to specialization on a
single prey, $s_k$. This illustrative example shows a three-prey system
with prey means $\{-15,-15+\mbox{offset},-15\}$ and equal variances;
colors depect specialization on prey 2 with a mean isotope value that is
a function of some offset amount. As the offset of the targeted prey
increases, so does the nonlinearity of ${\rm V}\{Z\}$. </span>

![image](fig_specvar.jpg)

**[figspecvar] Figure .**<span> Maximal consumer isotopic variance
$\hat s_k$ over the specialization index $s$ as a function of mixing
space geometry. <span>**(A)**</span> and <span>**(B)**</span> If the
targeted prey has a higher than average isotopic variance, the maximum
consumer niche width will lie towards consumer specialization.
<span>**(B)**</span> and <span>**(C)**</span> If the targeted prey has a
lower than average isotopic variance, the maximum consumer niche width
will like towards consumer generalization. <span>**(A)**</span>,
<span>**(B)**</span>, and <span>**(C)**</span> as the mean offset of the
targeted prey is farther from the centroid of the mixing space, the
maximal consumer isotopic niche width tends towards $s=0.5$. </span>

![image](fig_varZt.jpg)

**[figvarZt] Figure .**<span> <span>**(A)**</span> The proportional
contribution of Diet 1 to the composite diet $\mathbb{Z}$ over time.
<span>**(B)**</span> The isotopic variance of the composite diet
${\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\}$ when subdiets 1 and 2 have different means
and variances. The peak variance occurs during the dietary transitions
(green shading), whereas the troughs reflect the variances of subdiet 1
and 2, respectively (blue shading). <span>**(C)**</span> The isotopic
variance of the composite diet ${\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\}$ when subdiets
1 and 2 have the same means but different variances. When the subdiets
have the same means, ${\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\}$ oscillates to reflect
the respective variances of the subdiets, and does not exhibit peak
variance during the dietary transition. </span>

![image](fig_varzContour.jpg)

**[figvarcont] Figure .**<span> Components of the mixing space that
affects the time-averaged variance of the composite diet,
$\langle {\rm V}\{\mathbb{Z}\} \rangle_t$. As the average variance
between the subdiets increases, the time-averaged variance of the
composite diet increases. As the difference in the isotopic means of the
subdiets increase, the time-averaged variance of the composite diet
increases, though at a slower rate. </span>

![image](fig_xcsin.jpg)

**[figxcsin] Figure .**<span> <span>**(A)**</span> A sinusoidally
varying diet, where $\mathcal{U}(t) = 1/2 + 1/2\sin(\omega t$) for
increasing values of $\omega$, or equivalently, decreasing timescales of
dietary switching. <span>**(B)**</span> The isotopic variance of a
consumer over time ${\rm V}\{X_c(t)\}$ across increasing values of
$\omega$ relative to the consumer’s incorporation rate $\lambda$. As the
timescale of diet switching decreases relative to the timescale of
isotopic incorporation, the amplitude of isotopic variance decreases due
to increased isotopic averaging over faster shifts in diet. </span>

![image](fig_SOmixing.jpg)

**[figsomix] Figure .**<span> The isotopic mixing space
($\delta^{13}{\rm C}$ vs. $\delta^{15}{\rm N}$) for a sea otter consumer
near San Simeon and Monterey Bay, California, composed of nine commonly
consumed invertebrate species. Units are per-mil ($\permil$). </span>

![image](fig_ottervar.jpg)

**[figottervar] Figure .**<span> <span>**(A)**</span> Predicted variance
in $\delta^{13}{\rm C}$ of sea otter diets over different degrees of
specialization on each prey in the system (colors). <span>**(B)**</span>
Calculated maximum consumer niche width values as a function of
specialization and the offset of the prey isotopic mean from the mixing
space centroid. </span>

![image](fig_sawtooth.jpg)

**[figsawtooth] Figure .**<span> <span>**(A)**</span> The mean isotopic
value of the composite diet over time ${\rm E}\{\mathbb{Z}(t)\}$ when
diet-switching is discontinuous, following a square wave pattern, where
subdiets have a mean $\delta^{13}{\rm C}$ value of $-15$ and $-16$,
respectively. The mean isotopic value of the consumer over time
${\rm E}\{X_c(t)\}$ is observed to abruptly change directions when its
diet transitions, asymptoting towards (but not reaching) the isotopic
mean of its current diet. <span>**(B)**</span> Consumer isotopic
variance ${\rm V}\{X_c(t)\}$ follows a similar trajectory over time,
asymptoting towards (but not reaching) the isotope variance of its
current diet. When diets follow a discontinuous switching dynamic, the
peak variance does not appear at the transition, as it does when the
diet switching is smooth. </span>

![image](fig_indpopvar2.jpg)

**[figindpopvar] Figure .**<span> Population isotopic variance vs.
individual isotopic variance where mean isotope values of individuals
are randomly drawn from a Normal distribution (50 individuals per
population; 1000 replicates), and individuals are assumed to have the
same variance. <span>**(A)**</span> and <span>**(B)**</span> When the
mean values of individuals are randomly drawn from a normal distribution
with low variance, there is a linear relationship between
individual-level and population-level isotopic variance.
<span>**(C)**</span> and <span>**(D)**</span> When the mean values of
individuals are randomly drawn from a normal distribution with high
variance, the relationship becomes masked by noise. </span>

